documentation for making a SC quest (#3648)
streetcomplete/StreetComplete: CONTRIBUTING_A_NEW_QUEST.md

For code style and more general info - see [CONTRIBUTING file](CONTRIBUTING.md#development.md).

> If you want to contribute code to the StreetComplete then making a new quest is one of the easiest programming tasks. Implementing a quest with interface design matching an existing one is quite simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to contribute code to StreetComplete, then making a new quest is one of the easiest programming tasks. Implementing a quest with the interface design matching an existing one is quite simple.
```

> Contributions like that are highly welcomed and you would make mapping one more thing in OSM much easier!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contributions like that are highly welcome and you would make mapping one more thing in OSM much easier!
```

> Reading the text below is not necessary to create a new quest - a basic method of duplicating existing ones and modifying them may be sufficient. And people were creating new quests before this documentation existed.

Author: Not sure is it an improvement, it look worse to me (and people complained about overuse of ; () in my text, including people quite experienced in proofreading/editing)

> But these materials may help or be quicker than trying to explore how things work fully on your own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But these materials may help or be quicker than trying to fully explore on your own how things work.
```

# What is not required

- expert programming ability - you do not need to be an expert programmer to make contributions, basic programming abilities are sufficient to implement a quest similar to existing ones
- any Kotlin-specific or Android-specific knowledge - it is fine if you never did anything with Kotlin or Android

> - any Github specific knowledge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- any GitHub specific knowledge
```

> Please [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) if you are stuck despite this. 

Author: I am not getting what is improved here.

Is it intended to clarify meaning? Fix some grammar issue? Or is it supposed to sound better?

"Regardless" seems wrong here - as invitation for doing this applies to people who passed minimal requirements (if someone never ever programmed they should not create an issue here)

> Please [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) if you are stuck despite this. 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, clarify you're saying they got stuck despite the document, rather than the steps above.

> Or is it supposed to sound better?

Probably a bit of that.

> "Regardless" seems wrong here - as invitation for doing this applies to people who passed minimal requirements (if someone never ever programmed they should not create an issue here)

But you haven't listed any minimal requirements, just what they DON'T need!

> Please [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) if you are stuck despite this. 

Author: https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/e46a86b658ccfe6b20e73542d4033df611b04809/CONTRIBUTING_A_NEW_QUEST.md#required is section later, I need to think about it

> Please [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) if you are stuck despite this. 

Author: I fixed it by removing this segment after all.

# Required

- programming ability - it is not a good first task for someone who never programmed anything. 
  - Setup of environment takes long
  - Editing even the simplest quest requires edits to at least two different files
  - Kotlin familiarity is not needed, but the ability to adjust to a new syntax is needed
  - It is expected that someone trying this can search for a solution to a typical problems on encountering an error message
- familiarity with StreetComplete as a user - it is really recommended to be familiar with how StreetComplete works. Making hundreds of edits is not mandatory. But passing familiarity with how surveying with StreetComplete works is needed.
- time - Android Studio setup is sadly complicated

>   - Multiple hours are typical, though most spend on waiting for various downloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Multiple hours are typical, though mostly spent on waiting for various downloads
```

>   - setting up Android Studio will likely be more complex than writing the code

Author: It is possible to use it but I would not mention it - it is basically a dead end and this text is not suffering from being too short.

> - basic ability to use git (but as mentioned, anything GitHub specific will be explained) 

Author: Anyone aware of a good git tutorial?

So far I found https://git-scm.com/docs/user-manual as the best one.

Things like https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/hello-world are obscuring relation of git and github, so I prefer to not link them as a recommended one.

Honorary mention to https://girliemac.com/blog/2017/12/26/git-purr/

> - basic ability to use git (but as mentioned, anything GitHub specific will be explained) 

Author: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/install-git is relatively good

- GitHub account

> - around 15GB of a free space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- around 15GB of free space
```

  - the initial setup will download half of the Internet while getting emulators and dependencies. This is typical.

# Dependencies - initial setup

- install necessary software (Android Studio and git)

> - clone StreetComplete repository

Author: Good idea, added in https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/pull/3648/commits/22d4031658e7ccb6a7b6cc42141e09916152e393

- open StreetComplete in Android Studio

> - [setup an emulator in Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/emulator#install) (you can also connect to a real device via usb, this will not be later mentioned but can fully replace the emulator)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [setup an emulator in Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/emulator#install) (You can also connect to a real device via USB. This can fully replace the emulator, but this document won't go into more detail.)
```

Author: Here linking some docs (official ones preferably) would be nice

> - run StreetComple in emulator - to verify that everything was setup as required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- run StreetComple in the emulator (to verify that everything was setup as required)
```

> if you are doing it for the first time do not worry if there is some error to solve along the way. This is typical for setting up Android development. See [CONTRIBUTING file](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) which has some links to info about the setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are doing it for the first time, don't worry if there is some error to solve along the way. This is typical for setting up Android development. See [CONTRIBUTING file](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) which has some links to information about the setup.
```

# Invent a new quest

## Own ideas
To [repeat](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#developing-new-quests) from that documentation file:  [**open an issue** discussing the quest](#suggesting-new-quests), before starting other work. This way it can be confirmed that such quest can be included. This can be skipped if you are an [experienced](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/discussions/3450) StreetComplete contributor.

## Existing proposals
You can also look at [quest proposals waiting for implementation](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+quest%22).

# Learn from an existing code

## Find a base
Base the new quest on one that exists already.

Find one that has the same type of interface as the one that you are trying to implement.

> Are you trying to implement a quest that will affect roads and paths? Take `AddWayLit` quest as a base if it will be a yes/no question. `AddTracktype` where the mapper will be selecting one of the images.

Author: What about "mapper will be selecting one of presented images"?

"one of a number of images" has enough of references etc that it makes me confused.

> Is it going to be asked for POIs and be disabled by default? `AddWheelchairAccessBusiness` may be a good base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is it going to be asked for POIs and should be disabled by default? `AddWheelchairAccessBusiness` may be a good base.
```

> Quest are defined in [their own folder](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests).

Author: I meant that all quests are in app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests

- `emergency = defibrillator` tag must be present
- `access` tag must not have values `private` or `no` to skip ones where mapper will be unable to survey (`!~ private|no` - to be more specific optionA|optionB is treated like `^optionA|optionB$` regexp)
- `indoor` key must not be present at all, to show only ones where this tag is still missing

It is specified as a string, in syntax specific to StreetComplete. You can look around some quests to see how it works. If you are trying to implement a new quest and you got stuck here, [open a new issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues) to request more thorough documentation here.

#### Hints
The rules should be as exclusive as possible to generate as few false positives as possible. I.e. instead of asking for the surface of any way tagged with `highway=*`, the surface should instead only be asked for an inclusive list of roads.

Also, for very detailed information that can be assumed to always have the same ("undefined") answer in many countries, it might be a good idea to limit quests to an inclusive list of certain countries.

### Properties

> You can obtain more info about properties by mousing over a property and pressing Ctrl+Q within Android Studio

Reviewer 3: I do not know this specific editor but I think the cursor and not the mouse is important for the hotkey.
```suggestion
You can obtain more info about properties by placing the cursor in a property and pressing Ctrl+Q within Android Studio.
```
There are more sentences which misses a dot.

Author: Good catch, thanks!

mousing over a property and pressing Ctrl+Q

#### changesetComment
`override val changesetComment = "Add whether defibrillator is inside building"`
message used as a changeset comment

#### wikiLink

> `override val wikiLink = "Key:indoor"`
> 
> points to the OSM Wiki page most relevant to the given quest, typically it is an added key. In this case, it is a page about [indoor=* tagging](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:indoor).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`override val wikiLink = "Key:indoor"`
points to the OSM Wiki page most relevant to the given quest, typically it is an added key. In this case, it is a page about [indoor=* tagging](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:indoor).
```

Author: what is changed here? Removal of newline?

Reviewer 2: Yes, from the looks of things!

Reviewer 2: I think attaching it to the relevant code line above.

#### icon
`override val icon = R.drawable.ic_quest_defibrillator` 
icon drawable, you can initially use any icon. 

Do not worry, submissions with placeholder icons are also welcomed! In many cases icon itself was not made by the PR author.

More info about icon handling will be given later.

#### questTypeAchievements
`override val questTypeAchievements = listOf(LIFESAVER)`

In quest achievements list what is relevant to given quest, see the full list of available ones in [AchievementsModule.kt](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/user/achievements/AchievementsModule.kt)

#### getTitle
`override fun getTitle(tags: Map<String, String>) = R.string.quest_is_defibrillator_inside_title`
`    override fun createForm() = YesNoQuestAnswerFragment()`

> It is a message displayed to user, code here passes a [reference](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/resources/string-resource) to the string. You can change it to the new, not yet existing one and use a built in tool to place text.

Author: I guess that it is one of places that would really benefit from animation showing how this works. I meant using autofix provided by Android Studio for identifiers without corresponding string resource

- `changes.delete("amenity")` - remove key that must be present
- `changes.deleteIfExists("stile")` - remove key if present
- `changes.updateWithCheckDate("lit", answer.toYesNo())` - acts as `addOrModify` but will also update survey date and can be used in cases where tag value is not changing

See other ones defined in [StringMapChangesBuilder.kt](de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/edits/update_tags/StringMapChangesBuilder.kt)

### Extras

Info listed above must be supplied by every quest. But there are also several optional fields. This specific qest has
```
    override fun getHighlightedElements(element: Element, getMapData: () -> MapDataWithGeometry) =
        getMapData().filter("nodes with emergency = defibrillator")
```

which causes nearby `emergency = defibrillator` nodes to be shown (icons used are defined in [PinIcons.kt](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/map/PinIcons.kt))

See [also other optional properties](de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/osmquests/OsmElementQuestType.kt).

### Adding quest icon

It is OK to submit a quest without own icon, using any icon as a placeholder.

> But it would be even better to include also icon.

Author: I am not convinced that it is an improvement, it seems to be using more complex sentence structure without a benefit.

But I am not a native speaker...

> But it would be even better to include also icon.

Reviewer 2: You're not supposed to start a sentence with a but (grammatically).

Also this doesn't "scan" right:
"it would be even better to include also icon."

It should be this.
"it would be even better to also include an icon."

You could also drop the but and put "However..."

> But it would be even better to include also icon.

Author: @peternewman Hmmm. I went looking though this and found numerous claims that it is actually OK to start from "but".

Not entirely convinced here, but I am not a native speaker so I do really trust myself either.

- Select new → vector asset
- Select your svg file
- Name with `ic_quest_` prefix (something like `ic_quest_traffic_calming`), this will cause IDE to generate an XML file
- add an entry in the [attribution file](res/graphics/authors.txt)
- modify `icon` property in the quest definition to use the new drawable
- Commit modified or created files
- Compile, test quest in the emulator

The same method applies also to other vector drawables, only they will be placed in other parts of [res/graphics/](res/graphics/)

Inkscape is a typical tool to create and edit SVG files, it is a good, free, open-source so is available to all.

# Test

Obviously, testing can be done also earlier. But at least before submitting for review quest should be tested.

Typically it is done using an emulator. Note that you can set location in emulator settings rather than scrolling within StreetComplete itself.

* Is quest listed?
  * Look at the quest list in settings - is your quest appearing there? If not - see [this step](#Add quest to the list of active ones).
  * While you are there you can disable all quests except yours for an easier testing.
* Is it shown for expected elements?

> * Is it selected for some unwanted elements?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Is it **not** selected for some unwanted elements?
```

Author: I meant checking is it appearing for elements where it should not be triggered (for example asking about name for objects with name tagged because `!name` filter was missing)

* Can you tap on quest marker on open quest form?* an you fill answer as expected?
* Can you solve the quest?
* Is expected tagging being applied?
** You can look at logs for info what was applied or use undo menu from bottom-left.
** You can freely answer - as long as you are not logged in, nothing will be submitted. Even after logging in you can disable uploading answers.
* Is quest disappearing after being solved?

# Open a pull request

[Pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) is a submission of proposed changes to the source code.

You can put into the description of PR something like "fixes #1234" to [mark it as fixing this issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue#linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue-using-a-keyword). It can go into a commit message or PR description ([not its title](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/discussions/2917), it is a known GitHub bug).

> If you are stuck on something, need some help or guidance and you are willing and able to continue after solving the problem - you can open a pull request in an incomplete state and mention the blocker.

Reviewer 2: Mention draft state here?

Author: Hmm. It is quite long, is quite self explanatory and can be changed by maintainers. And this document is far too long.

I will skip it.

You can see [already submitted pull requests](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/pulls?q=is%3Apr+) to see how this process works in practice.

# Future

> After opening a pull request it will be reviewed and you will likely be asked to make some changes. This is normal and happens also with pull requests submitted by experienced contributors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After opening a pull request it will be reviewed and you will likely be asked to make some changes. This is normal and also happens with pull requests submitted by experienced contributors.
```

Changes typically include improving code style, tweaking phrasing and quest settings.

You are also welcome to help with reviewing other PRs - different people have different strengths, there are active reviewers who help with code style, there are some native speakers of English, some with deep knowledge of OSM tagging schemes or deep knowledge of how StreetComplete works.

> After the PR was finished it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the PR is finished it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).
```
or
```suggestion
After the PR reviews are finished it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).
```

After full release it will reach the entire StreetComplete audience who now will be able to more easily contribute to OpenStreetMap. Thanks in advance for that!

# Bad documentation is a bug

> Unclear documentation, including this one, is a bug. Feel free to either submit a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) with a fix or [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) describing your confusion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unclear documentation, including this document, is a bug. Feel free to either submit a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) with a fix or [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) describing your confusion.
```

Author: Is documentation/document repetition better than "one" (I thought that it is a correct use, may be wrong about it)

Reviewer 2: I think it's about tenses and stuff, it just doesn't feel right. This would work:
```suggestion
Unclear documents, including this one, are a bug. Feel free to either submit a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) with a fix or [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) describing your confusion.
```

Or:
```suggestion
Unclear documentation, including this, is a bug. Feel free to either submit a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) with a fix or [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) describing your confusion.
```

> Note that not everything will be directly described. This document is very intentionally not including step-by-step guide to install Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to an official docs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that not everything will be directly described. This document is very intentionally not including step-by-step guide to install Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to an official docs instead.
```

> Note that not everything will be directly described. This document is very intentionally not including step-by-step guide to install Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to an official docs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that not everything will be directly described. This document is very intentionally not including step-by-step guide to install Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to official docs instead.
```

# More complexity

> What was described above is an attempt to cover all aspects of quest creation, without describing all complexity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What was described above is an attempt to cover all aspects of quest creation, without describing all the complexity.
```

## Existing proposals
You can also look at [quest proposals waiting for implementation](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+quest%22).

# Learn from an existing code

## Find a base
Base the new quest on one that exists already.

Find one that has the same type of interface as the one that you are trying to implement.

Are you trying to implement a quest that will affect roads and paths? Take `AddWayLit` quest as a base if it will be a yes/no question. `AddTracktype` where the mapper will be selecting one of the images.

Is it going to be asked for POIs and be disabled by default? `AddWheelchairAccessBusiness` may be a good base.

Quest are defined in [their own folder](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests).

### Locating quest

Search across code for part of a question or other text characteristic to this message. For example "What is the name of this place"

You will find an XML file with entry looking like this:

`<string name="quest_placeName_title_name">"What is the name of this place? (%s)"</string>`

> The code `quest_placeName_title_name` is string reference, used in code to alow translations.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The code `quest_placeName_title_name` is string reference, used in code to allow translations.
```

Add your quest to the list so that it will be loaded by the app.

## Quest anatomy
See for example [simple yes/no quest asking whether AED is indoor or outdoor](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/defibrillator/AddIsDefibrillatorIndoor.kt).

TODO: maybe linking [app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/osmquests/OsmElementQuestType.kt](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/osmquests/OsmElementQuestType.kt) would be better? And extend documentation there?

### Element selection
elementFilter property defines nodes, ways and relations which will be selected for a given quest. It is an element selection used by OsmFilterQuestType.

```
"""
        nodes with
         emergency = defibrillator
         and access !~ private|no
         and !indoor
"""
``` 

> This query will be limited to nodes (`nodes with`), which fulfil some requirements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This query will be limited to nodes (`nodes with`), which fulfill some requirements.
```

If you are stuck on something, need some help or guidance and you are willing and able to continue after solving the problem - you can open a pull request in an incomplete state and mention the blocker.

You can see [already submitted pull requests](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/pulls?q=is%3Apr+) to see how this process works in practice.

# Future

After opening a pull request it will be reviewed and you will likely be asked to make some changes. This is normal and happens also with pull requests submitted by experienced contributors.

Changes typically include improving code style, tweaking phrasing and quest settings.

You are also welcome to help with reviewing other PRs - different people have different strengths, there are active reviewers who help with code style, there are some native speakers of English, some with deep knowledge of OSM tagging schemes or deep knowledge of how StreetComplete works.

> After the PR was finished it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After the PR is approved it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).
```

Author: PR can be also approved by one person and another find a serious issues being present, blocking merge

Reviewer 5: fair enough :)

Each of this folders should hold the same image resized to a different resolution. While testing various images it is enough to put into one folder.

The [rescaling script](https://github.com/matkoniecz/rescaling_for_android) may be useful, but you can also do this manually with Gimp or similar software.

After adding a file remember to update [the credit file](app/src/main/res/authors.txt) (different than one for icons).

## Custom filters
It is possible to use far more complex filters when querying for eligible elements.

Matches like `surface ~ earth|dirt|ground` are possible and are evaluated as "`surface` is either of `earth`, `dirt`, `ground`"

`access !~ private|no` will be evaluated to "`access` is neither `private` nor `no`"

Simple lists are [evaluated as sets](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/2e812b9a3b5288983309a7edde6e8f9db05ad3f2/app/src/test/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/elementfilter/filters/ElementFilterOverpassKtTest.kt#L79-L88) - and for example `surface ~ earth|dirt|ground` will not match `surface=earther` tag. Basically, `surface ~ earth|dirt|ground` is treated as `surface ~ ^earth|dirt|ground$`

> But using regexp like `surface ~ ^(.*)[0-9]$` is [also possible](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/test/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/elementfilter/filters/ElementFilterOverpassKtTest.kt#L79-L88).

Reviewer 5: Personally I'd not reference to the master branch in such a document, but pick a commit. This way, the line highlighting is still intact after years (in case this document get's outdated). This would also apply to the other links to code in this paragraph.

Author: That was one of things that was concerning to me. But I thought about not linking specific lines, but linking entire files as a replacement. This would have and additional benefit of links working locally an not being tied to GitHub.

If file gets changed significantly then stealthily linking outdated one is the worst case.

I guess that linking specific comment would help in case where content is up to date and just moved few lines up or down. I planned to monitor it and check after few months is it a big problem. I expect most or all linked code to be fairly stable.

Reviewer 2: But if the file has been changed significantly, it's likely the documentation is wrong anyway (e.g. when the name of the commit message changed, or passing in new data like timestamps instead).

Reviewer 4: it has _**already**_ proven to be unstable at several places: https://github.com/matkoniecz/Zazolc/issues/6, so I think linking to specific release tag is much better idea (as detailed at that issue).

- Select your SVG file
- Name with `ic_quest_` prefix (something like `ic_quest_traffic_calming`), this will cause IDE to generate an XML file
- add an entry in the [attribution file](res/graphics/authors.txt)
- modify `icon` property in the quest definition to use the new drawable
- Commit modified or created files
- Compile, test quest in the emulator

The same method applies also to other vector drawables, although they will be placed in other parts of [res/graphics/](res/graphics/)

Inkscape is a typical tool to create and edit SVG files, it is a good, free and open-source so is available to all.

# Test

Obviously, testing can also be done earlier. But the quest should at least be tested before submitting for review.

Typically it is done using an emulator. Note that you can set location in emulator settings rather than scrolling within StreetComplete itself.

* Is quest listed?
  * Look at the quest list in settings - is your quest appearing there? If not - see [this step](#Add quest to the list of active ones).
  * While you are there you can disable all quests except yours for easier testing.
* Is it shown for expected elements?
* Is it selected for some unwanted elements?

> * Can you tap on quest marker on open quest form?

Reviewer 2: Do you mean:
```suggestion
* Can you tap on quest marker while the quest form is open?
```

Author: I meant "to open", will fix it

You are also welcome to help with reviewing other PRs - different people have different strengths, there are active reviewers who help with code style, there are some native speakers of English, some with deep knowledge of OSM tagging schemes or deep knowledge of how StreetComplete works.

After the PR is finished it will be merged before the beta release of the next version. This way it can be additionally tested with a wider audience before release to all and translators can [translate text into other languages](CONTRIBUTING.md#translating-the-app).

After full release it will reach the entire StreetComplete audience who now will be able to more easily contribute to OpenStreetMap. Thanks in advance for that!

# Bad documentation is a bug

Unclear documentation, including this one, is a bug. Feel free to either submit a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) with a fix or [open an issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/new) describing your confusion.

> Note that not everything will be directly described. This document is very intentionally not including step-by-step guide to install Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to official docs instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that not everything will be directly described. This document very intentionally doesn't include a step-by-step guide to installing Android Studio, [linking](CONTRIBUTING.md#development) to official docs instead.
```

# More complexity
What was described above is an attempt to cover all aspects of quest creation, without describing all the complexity.

Below is some additional info.

## getTitle Parameters
In some cases, the quest will mention the name and type of feature. For example, in the case of shops to make their identification possible.

This requires preparing space in the message for filling at runtime,

And to add the mechanism supplying this data. Here is [some typical code](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/wheelchair_access/AddWheelchairAccessBusiness.kt#L102-L111) that will:

```
    override fun getTitle(tags: Map<String, String>) =
        if (hasFeatureName(tags))
            R.string.quest_wheelchairAccess_name_type_title
        else
            R.string.quest_wheelchairAccess_name_title

    override fun getTitleArgs(tags: Map<String, String>, featureName: Lazy<String?>): Array<String> {
        val name = tags["name"] ?: tags["brand"]
        return arrayOfNotNull(name, featureName.value)
    }
``` 

> - try to pass name, feature type (such as "greengrocer", translated to the proper language)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- try to pass name or feature type (such as "greengrocer", translated to the proper language)
```
```suggestion
- try to pass name and feature type (such as "greengrocer", translated to the proper language)
```

Author: rewriting it substantially, thanks for pointing to a confused section

- Don't rely on the "leave a note" fallback too much. It is not intended and does not work as a regular answer but is designed to cover the case that the question was invalid itself because it was based on wrong data like i.e. the place does not exist anymore.
- The information the user should fill in should be as atomic as possible. Users are impatient. I.e. do not let them fill out a whole address with street name etc. when just the house number is fine too.
- "A picture is worth a thousand words": Often the term for certain things may not be enough to convey the meaning of certain predefined answers. Do you know what a wheelbender is? You will know if you see the photo. 

Considerations about the edge cases to consider, how the design could look like and finding good representative photos or icons that match in style is also part of the preparational work that can be done without programming knowledge.

## New photos

Some quests will require photos for their interface.

> Photo must be available on open license - so not every photo found across the Internet is usable. You can either take own photo or find an existing freely licensed photo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Photos must be available on open license - so not every photo found on the Internet is usable. You can either take your own photo or find an existing freely licensed photo.
```

Good places to find freely licensed images are [Geograph](https://www.geograph.org.uk/) and [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/).

You can also take your own photos, a standard smartphone camera is good enough. And sometimes a highly specific image is needed.

In StreetComplete many images have unusual composition. Often it is necessary to leave space for a label at the bottom.

Images should be free of visual debris, not misleading. Though it is fine to use an image not strictly matching what is depicted, as long as it is clear. For example, [a permanent pile of soil blocking road](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:barrier%3Ddebris) is illustrated by a [temporary landslide](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Landslide_on_OR_42S_(46849629014).jpg). This is OK as images are illustrative.

Photos go to a different folder than SVGs: they can be used directly by the build process so put them into folders

>   - [mdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-mdpi) (typically 128 x 128 pixels, for rectangular ones smaller dimension should be 128 pixels)
>   - [hdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-hdpi) (typically 192 x 192 pixels, for rectangular ones smaller dimension should be 192 pixels)
>   - [xhdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-xhdpi) (typically 256 x 256 pixels, for rectangular ones smaller dimension should be 256 pixels)
>   - [xxhdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-xxhdpi) (typically 384 x 384 pixels, for rectangular ones smaller dimension should be 384 pixels)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [mdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-mdpi) (typically 128 x 128 pixels, for rectangular ones, smaller dimension should be 128 pixels)
  - [hdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-hdpi) (typically 192 x 192 pixels, for rectangular ones, smaller dimension should be 192 pixels)
  - [xhdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-xhdpi) (typically 256 x 256 pixels, for rectangular ones, smaller dimension should be 256 pixels)
  - [xxhdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-xxhdpi) (typically 384 x 384 pixels, for rectangular ones, smaller dimension should be 384 pixels)
```

Each of this folders should hold the same image resized to a different resolution. While testing various images it is enough to put into one folder.

The [rescaling script](https://github.com/matkoniecz/rescaling_for_android) may be useful, but you can also do this manually with Gimp or similar software.

> After adding a file remember to update [the credit file](app/src/main/res/authors.txt) (different than one for icons).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After adding a photo, remember to update [the credit file](app/src/main/res/authors.txt) (different to the one for icons).
```

It is possible to share and reuse [information about tagging schemes](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/surface/AddRoadSurface.kt#L18).

(this info is gathered [here](/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/meta/OsmTaggings.kt))

Even more complex ones using different class bases are possible. Such as what was needed by the [address quest](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/address/AddAddressStreet.kt) or the [crossing quest](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/crossing/AddCrossing.kt) but it is better to start from something simpler.

> It allows to make complex geometry checks, but writing them is also far more complex.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It allows you to make complex geometry checks, but writing them is also far more complex.
```
Or:
```suggestion
It allows it to make complex geometry checks, but writing them is also far more complex.
```

## New photos

Some quests will require photos for their interface.

Photos must be available on open license - so not every photo found on the Internet is usable. You can either take your own photo or find an existing freely licensed photo.

Good places to find freely licensed images are [Geograph](https://www.geograph.org.uk/) and [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/).

You can also take your own photos, a standard smartphone camera is good enough. And sometimes a highly specific image is needed.

In StreetComplete many images have unusual composition. Often it is necessary to leave space for a label at the bottom.

Images should be free of visual debris, not misleading. Though it is fine to use an image not strictly matching what is depicted, as long as it is clear. For example, [a permanent pile of soil blocking road](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:barrier%3Ddebris) is illustrated by a [temporary landslide](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Landslide_on_OR_42S_(46849629014).jpg). This is OK as images are illustrative.

Photos go to a different folder than SVGs: they can be used directly by the build process so put them into folders

>   - [mdpi](app/src/main/res/drawable-mdpi) (typically 128 x 128 pixels, for rectangular ones smaller dimension should be 128 pixels)

Author: This is more complex, see https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues/3725

This file describes in detail the process of creating a new quest.

For code style and more general info - see [CONTRIBUTING file](CONTRIBUTING.md#development).

If you want to contribute code to StreetComplete, then making a new quest is one of the easiest programming tasks. It is quite easy to implement a quest where layout design matches an existing quest. For example one more yes/no quest or where user taps one of displayed images.

Contributions like that are highly welcomed and you would make mapping one more thing in OSM much easier! You can implement it also if you never used Kotlin or implemented anything for Android. Being highly experienced programmer is not necessary here.

Reading the text below is not necessary to create a new quest. Duplicating existing quest and modifying its code may be sufficient. And people were creating new quests before this documentation existed.

But this materials may help or be quicker than trying to fully explore on your own how things work.

# Required

- programming ability - it is not a good task for someone who has never programmed anything.
  - Setup of environment takes a long time

>   - Editing even the simplest quest requires edits to at least two different files

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Editing even the simplest quest requires edits to at least three different files
```

  - Kotlin familiarity is not required, but the ability to adjust to a new syntax is needed. If you are unfamiliar with Kotlin reading about [null safety related syntax](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/null-safety.html) is likely to be very useful.
  - It is expected that someone trying this can search for a solution to a typical problem on encountering an error message
- familiarity with StreetComplete as a user - it is highly recommended to be familiar with how StreetComplete works. Making hundreds of edits is not mandatory, but having a passing familiarity with how surveying with StreetComplete works is needed.
- time - Android Studio setup is sadly complicated
  - Multiple hours are typical, though mostly spent on waiting for various downloads
  - setting up Android Studio will likely be more complex than writing the code
- [basic ability to use git](https://git-scm.com/docs/user-manual) (but as mentioned, anything GitHub specific will be explained)
  - there is version control integration available in Android Studio

>     - From the Android Studio **VCS** menu, click **Enable Version Control** Integration ([see official docs](https://developer.android.com/studio/intro#version_control_basics)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - From the Android Studio **VCS** menu, click **Enable Version Control** Integration ([see official docs](https://developer.android.com/studio/intro#version_control_basics))
```

Add your quest to the list so that it will be loaded by the app.

## Quest anatomy
See for example [simple yes/no quest asking whether AED is indoor or outdoor](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/defibrillator/AddIsDefibrillatorIndoor.kt).

TODO: maybe linking [app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/osmquests/OsmElementQuestType.kt](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/osm/osmquests/OsmElementQuestType.kt) would be better? And extend documentation there?

### Element selection
elementFilter property defines nodes, ways and relations which will be selected for a given quest. It is an element selection used by OsmFilterQuestType.

```
"""
        nodes with
         emergency = defibrillator
         and access !~ private|no
         and !indoor
"""
``` 

This query will be limited to nodes (`nodes with`), which fulfill some requirements.

- `emergency = defibrillator` tag must be present

> - `access` tag must not have values `private` or `no` to skip ones where mapper will be unable to survey (`!~ private|no` - to be more specific `optionA|optionB` is treated like `^optionA|optionB$` regexp)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `access` tag must not have values `private` or `no` to skip ones where mapper will be unable to survey (`!~ private|no` - to be more specific `optionA|optionB` is treated like `^optionA|optionB$` [regexp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression))
```

- `indoor` key must not be present at all, to show only ones where this tag is still missing

It is specified as a string, in syntax specific to StreetComplete. You can look around some quests to see how it works. If you are trying to implement a new quest and you got stuck here, [open a new issue](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/issues) to request more thorough documentation here.

###### Resurvey

Some quests are asked not only when tag is missing but also when it is likely to be outdated.

Typical code is in [quest asking about motorcycle parking capacity](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/motorcycle_parking_capacity/AddMotorcycleParkingCapacity.kt):

```
    override val elementFilter = """
        nodes, ways with amenity = motorcycle_parking
         and access !~ private|no
         and (!capacity or capacity older today -4 years)
    """
```  
  
This quest will be triggered when:

 - on nodes and ways
 - where `amenity = motorcycle_parking` tag is present

>  - `access` tag is not set with value `private` or `no`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - `access` tag does not have value `private` nor `no`
```

("is not set" sounds confusing to me here, as it can be read apart from the rest of the sentence, implying `access` is undefined). But I suspect even nicer English sentence is possible

#### Form

`override fun createForm() = YesNoQuestAnswerFragment()`

Form defines interface used by mappers.

In this case, the simplest possible is used.

But sometimes more complex ones are needed, see for example [AddBridgeStructure.kt](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/bridge_structure/AddBridgeStructure.kt) 

`override fun createForm() = AddBridgeStructureForm()`

With form defined in [AddBridgeStructureForm](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/bridge_structure/AddBridgeStructureForm.kt)
### applyAnswerTo
```
    override fun applyAnswerTo(answer: Boolean, tags: Tags, timestampEdited: Long) {
        tags["indoor"] = answer.toYesNo()
    }
``` 

This code is responsible for modifying `tags` object (passed by reference).

In this case it would set `indoor` tag to have either `yes` or `no` answer, depending on selection in the quest interface.

Actions may include (examples from various quests):

- `tags["indoor"] = answer.toYesNo()`
- `tags.remove("amenity")` - remove key if it is present

> - `tags.updateWithCheckDate("lit", answer.toYesNo())`

Reviewer 4: it probably should be mentioned that `updateWithCheckDate()` should (must?) be used if quest supports resurvey (e.g. if it has `!lit or lit older today -16 years` or similar)

>   - in case of changing value such change will be applied

Reviewer 4: - I'm confused what this `in case of changing value such change will be applied` even means ?

>   - in case of changing value such change will be applied
>   - in case of value being the same: add survey date tag, it would be `check_date:lit=` in this case
>      - so can be used even if value will stay the same - possible for resurvey quests
>      - survey date prefix is defined as [`const val SURVEY_MARK_KEY = "check_date"`](src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/meta/OsmTaggings.kt)
>   - always update survey tag if present already

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - `updateWithCheckDate()` method should always be used if your quest supports resurvey, in order for it to do resurveys at correct intervals (otherwise unrelated change to the node would reset resurvey counter)
  - if the new value differs from existing tag value: new value will be applied
  - if the new value is the same as existing tag value: adds [survey date tag](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/meta/OsmTaggings.kt#L33) (`check_date:lit=` in this example)
  - always update survey date tag (e.g.`check_date:lit=`) if it is present already
```

I think this is more clear and concise this way, while retaining all important information. line number should be kept up to date / forced to some commit version of file (same as all other links linking to line numbers elsewhere). 

While nice explanation and very useful for debug, I'm wondering if it would be more useful as a comment in the code around `updateWithCheckDate()` and thr "begginer quest writing docs" reduced just to `yout must use updateWithCheckDate() if y

Author: partially done, partially done differently, partially not fan of some ideas, partially migrated to https://github.com/matkoniecz/Zazolc/issues/9

# More complexity
What was described above is an attempt to cover all aspects of quest creation, without describing all the complexity.

Below is some additional info.

## getTitle and getTitleArgs

In some cases it is desirable to change quest title, based on specific object.

This requires preparing space in the message for filling at runtime, and to add the mechanism supplying data to replace placeholders.

### Display value of tag if it is present

[AddFireHydrantDiameter](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/fire_hydrant_diameter/AddFireHydrantDiameter.kt) displays `ref` code of hydrant, if tagged.

```
    override fun getTitleArgs(tags: Map<String, String>, featureName: Lazy<String?>): Array<String> =
        arrayOfNotNull(tags["ref"])

    override fun getTitle(tags: Map<String, String>): Int {
        val hasRef = tags.containsAnyKey("ref")
        return when {
            hasRef -> R.string.quest_fireHydrant_diameter_ref_title
            else   -> R.string.quest_fireHydrant_diameter_title
        }
    }
```

> ``getTitleArgs` will return either array with single element containing value of `ref` tag or an empty array. In either cases it will be passed to code displaying title at runtime.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`getTitleArgs` will return either array with single element containing value of `ref` tag or an empty array. In either cases it will be passed to code displaying title at runtime.
```

`arrayOfNotNull` is a minor helper function [defined in StreetComplete](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/ktx/Collections.kt). Note that when you open code in Android Studio or other IDE you can easily go to place where given function is defined.

> ``getTitle` provide identifier of text which will be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`getTitle` provide identifier of text which will be
```

fix markdown; also seems to be missing the end of sentence: `which will be.... what?`

> So `getTitle` function that returns identifier to text in [strings file](app/src/main/res/values/strings.xml). It will be either 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
So `getTitle` function that returns identifier to text in [strings file](app/src/main/res/values/strings.xml). It will be either:
```

* `quest_fireHydrant_diameter_ref_title` which represents `What diameter is specified on the sign for this fire hydrant? (reference number: %s)` (or translation). `%s` is a [placeholder](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/resources/string-resource.html#formatting-strings) and will be replaced by text provided by `getTitleArgs`

> * In case of ref tag being not present `quest_fireHydrant_diameter_title` (`What diameter is specified on the sign for this fire hydrant?` will be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* In case of ref tag being not present `quest_fireHydrant_diameter_title` (`What diameter is specified on the sign for this fire hydrant?`) will be used.
```

* In case of no feature name being available `quest_wheelchairAccess_name_title` will be used, with space for one parameter: `Is %s wheelchair accessible?` (`%s` is a single placeholder which will be replaced by text parameter)

### Kotlin
Article about [null safety related syntax](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/null-safety.html) is likely to be very useful, especially if you are confused by `?:` [Elvis operator](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/null-safety.html#elvis-operator).

## Designing the form

As mentioned, the user interface must leave no space for misunderstandings, it must be concise and quick and easy to use. Also sounds obvious, but you will quickly find out that a balance must be found between covering all the edge cases and designing the form to be as straightforward and clutterless as possible.

- Design the main form clutter-free so that it is straightforward for the majority of use cases.

> - Allow to answer popular edge cases, but don't clutter up the main form with that. A good pattern is to move such answers into the "Other answers..." menu. I.e. look at the opening hours quest.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Allow to answer popular edge cases, but don't clutter up the main form with that. A good pattern is to move such answers into the "Other answers..." menu. E.g. look at the [opening hours quest](app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/opening_hours/AddOpeningHoursForm.kt#L40-L48).
```

It is possible to share and reuse [information about tagging schemes](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/surface/AddRoadSurface.kt#L18).

(this info is gathered [here](/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/data/meta/OsmTaggings.kt))

Even more complex ones using different class bases are possible. Such as what was needed by the [address quest](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/address/AddAddressStreet.kt) or the [crossing quest](https://github.com/streetcomplete/StreetComplete/blob/master/app/src/main/java/de/westnordost/streetcomplete/quests/crossing/AddCrossing.kt) but it is better to start from something simpler.

It allows it to make complex geometry checks, but writing them is also far more complex.

## `enabledInCountries`

> Some quests should be enabled only in some countries or disabled in a specific countries.

Reviewer 4: also should list example quest for "disabled by default" quests somewhere near here

Author: added
